The following is a conversation with David Ferrochi.
He led the team that built Watson,
the IBM question answering system
that beat the top humans in the world
at the game of jeopardy.
For spending a couple hours with David,
I saw a genuine passion,
not only for abstract understanding of intelligence,
but for engineering it to solve real world problems
under real world deadlines and resource constraints.
Where science meets engineering
is where brilliant simple ingenuity emerges.
People who work and joining it to have a lot of wisdom
earned through failures and eventual success.
David is also the founder, CEO
and chief scientist of Elemental Cognition,
a company working to engineer AI systems
that understand the world the way people do.
This is the Artificial Intelligence podcast.
If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
give it five stars on iTunes,
support it on Patreon or simply connect with me on Twitter.
Alex Friedman spelled F R I D M A N.
And now here's my conversation with David Ferrochi.
Your undergrad was in biology
with an eye toward medical school
before you went on for the PhD in computer science.
So let me ask you an easy question.
What is the difference between biological systems
and computer systems?
In your, when you sit back,
look at the stars and think philosophically.
I often wonder,
I often wonder whether or not there is a substantive difference.
And I think the thing that got me into computer science
and into artificial intelligence
was exactly this presupposition
that if we can get machines to think
or I should say this question, this philosophical question,
if we can get machines to think,
to understand, to process information the way we do,
so if we can describe a procedure, describe a process,
even if that process,
where the intelligence process itself,
then what would be the difference?
So from a philosophical standpoint,
I'm not trying to convince that there is.
I mean, you can go in the direction of spirituality,
you can go in the direction of the soul,
but in terms of what we can experience
from an intellectual and physical perspective,
I'm not sure there is.
Clearly there are different implementations,
but if you were to say,
is a biological information processing system
fundamentally more capable
than one we might be able to build out of silicon
or some other substrate,
I don't know that there is.
How distant do you think is the biological implementation?
So fundamentally, they may have the same capabilities,
but is it really a far mystery
where a huge number of breakthroughs are needed
to be able to understand it,
or is it something that for the most part
in the important aspects,
echoes of the same kind of characteristics?
Yeah, that's interesting.
I mean, so your question presupposes
that there's this goal to recreate
what we perceive as biological intelligence.
I'm not sure that's the,
I'm not sure that's how I would state the goal.
I mean, I think that's studying.
What is the goal?
Good, so I think there are a few goals.
I think that understanding the human brain
and how it works is important for us
to be able to diagnose and treat issues
for us to understand our own strengths and weaknesses,
both intellectual, psychological, and physical.
So neuroscience and understanding the brain
from that perspective, there's a clear, clear goal there.
From the perspective of saying,
I want to mimic human intelligence.
That one's a little bit more interesting.
Human intelligence certainly has a lot of things we envy.
It's also got a lot of problems too.
So I think we're capable of sort of stepping back
and saying, what do we want out of an intelligence?
How do we want to communicate with that intelligence?
How do we want it to behave?
How do we want it to perform?
Now, of course, it's somewhat of an interesting argument
because I'm sitting here as a human with a biological brain
and I'm critiquing the strengths and weaknesses
of human intelligence and saying
that we have the capacity to step back
and say, gee, what is intelligence
and what do we really want out of it?
And that even in and of itself suggests
that human intelligence is something quite enviable,
that it can introspect that way.
And the flaws, you mentioned the flaws,
the humans have flaws.
Yeah, I think that flaws that human intelligence has
is extremely prejudicial and bias
in the way it draws many inferences.
Do you think those are sorry to interrupt?
Do you think those are features or are those bugs?
Do you think the prejudice, the forgetfulness,
the fear, what are the flaws?
List them all, what love, maybe that's a flaw.
You think those are all things that can be gotten,
get in the weight of intelligence
or the essential components of intelligence?
Well, again, if you go back and you define intelligence
as being able to sort of accurately, precisely,
rigorously reason, develop answers
and justify those answers in an objective way,
yeah, then human intelligence has these flaws
and that it tends to be more influenced
by some of the things you said.
And it's largely an inductive process,
meaning it takes past data, uses that to predict the future,
very advantageous in some cases,
but fundamentally biased and prejudicial in other cases
because it's gonna be strongly influenced by its priors,
whether they're right or wrong
from some objective reasoning perspective,
you're gonna favor them because those are the decisions
or those are the paths that succeeded in the past.
And I think that mode of intelligence
makes a lot of sense for when your primary goal
is to act quickly and survive and make fast decisions.
And I think those create problems
when you wanna think more deeply
and make more objective and reasoned decisions.
Of course, humans capable of doing both.
They do sort of one more naturally than they do the other,
but they're capable of doing both.
You're saying they do the one that responds quickly
and more naturally?
Right.
Because that's the thing we kinda need to not be eaten
by the predators in the world.
For example, but then we've learned
to reason through logic, we've developed science,
we train people to do that.
I think that's harder for the individual to do.
I think it requires training and teaching.
I think we are, human mind certainly is capable of it,
but we find it more difficult.
And then there are other weaknesses, if you will,
as you mentioned earlier, just memory capacity
and how many chains of inference can you actually
go through without like losing your way?
So just focus and...
So the way you think about intelligence,
and we're really sort of floating
in this philosophical space,
but I think you're like the perfect person
to talk about this because we'll get to Jeopardy and Beyond.
That's like an incredible, one of the most incredible
accomplishments in AI, in the history of AI,
but hence the philosophical discussion.
So let me ask, you've kind of alluded to it,
but let me ask again, what is intelligence?
Underlying the discussions we'll have
with Jeopardy and Beyond,
how do you think about intelligence?
Is it a sufficiently complicated problem,
being able to reason your way through solving that problem?
Is that kind of how you think about
what it means to be intelligent?
So I think of intelligence two, primarily two ways.
One is the ability to predict.
So in other words, if I have a problem,
can I predict what's gonna happen next,
whether it's to predict the answer of a question
or to say, look, I'm looking at all the market dynamics
and I'm gonna tell you what's gonna happen next,
or you're in a room and somebody walks in
and you're gonna predict what they're gonna do next
or what they're gonna say next.
So in a highly dynamic environment full of uncertainty,
be able to predict.
The more variables, the more complex,
the more possibilities, the more complex.
But can I take a small amount of prior data
and learn the pattern and then predict
what's gonna happen next accurately and consistently?
That's certainly a form of intelligence.
What do you need for that, by the way?
You need to have an understanding
of the way the world works
in order to be able to unroll it into the future, right?
What do you think is needed to predict?
Depends what you mean by understanding.
I need to be able to find that function.
This is very much what deep learning does,
machine learning does, is if you give me enough prior data
and you tell me what the output variable is that matters,
I'm gonna sit there and be able to predict it.
And if I can predict it accurately
so that I can get it right more often than not,
I'm smart.
If I can do that with less data and less training time,
I'm even smarter.
If I can figure out what's even worth predicting,
I'm smarter, meaning I'm figuring out
what path is gonna get me toward a goal.
What about picking a goal?
Sorry to interrupt again.
Well, that's interesting about picking a goal,
sort of an interesting thing.
And I think that's where you bring in,
what do you pre program to do?
We talk about humans and well,
humans are pre programmed to survive.
So it's sort of their primary driving goal.
What do they have to do to do that?
And that can be very complex, right?
So it's not just figuring out that you need to run away
from the ferocious tiger,
but we survive in a social context as an example.
So understanding the subtleties of social dynamics
becomes something that's important for surviving,
finding a mate, reproducing, right?
So we're continually challenged
with complex, excessive variables, complex constraints,
rules, if you will, or patterns.
And we learn how to find the functions
and predict the things.
In other words, represent those patterns efficiently
and be able to predict what's gonna happen.
And that's a form of intelligence.
That doesn't really require anything specific
other than the ability to find that function
and predict that right answer.
That's certainly a form of intelligence.
But then when we say, well, do we understand each other?
In other words, would you perceive me as intelligent
beyond that ability to predict?
So now I can predict, but I can't really articulate
how I'm going through that process,
what my underlying theory is for predicting.
And I can't get you to understand what I'm doing
so that you can figure out how to do this yourself
if you did not have, for example,
the right pattern matching machinery that I did.
And now we potentially have this breakdown.
We're in effect, I'm intelligent,
but I'm sort of an alien intelligence relative to you.
You're intelligent, but nobody knows about it.
Well, I can see the output.
So you're saying, let's sort of separate the two things.
One is you explaining why you were able to predict
the future, and the second is me being able to,
like impressing me that you're intelligent,
me being able to know that you successfully predicted
the future, do you think that's...
Well, it's not impressing you that I'm intelligent.
In other words, you may be convinced
that I'm intelligent in some form.
So how, what would convince me?
Because of my ability to predict.
So I would look at the metrics and I'd say, wow,
you're right, you're right more times than I am.
You're doing something interesting,
that's a form of intelligence.
But then what happens is, if I say, how are you doing that?
And you can't communicate with me
and you can't describe that to me.
Now I may label you a savant.
I may say, well, you're doing something weird
and it's just not very interesting to me
because you and I can't really communicate.
And so this is interesting, right?
Because now you're in this weird place
where for you to be recognized as intelligent
the way I'm intelligent,
then you and I sort of have to be able to communicate.
And then we start to understand each other
and then my respect and my appreciation,
my ability to relate to you starts to change.
So now you're not an alien intelligence anymore.
You're a human intelligence now
because you and I can communicate.
And so I think when we look at animals,
for example, animals can do things,
we can't quite comprehend,
we don't quite know how they do them,
but they can't really communicate with us.
They can't put what they're going through in our terms.
And so we think of them as sort of low.
They're these alien intelligences
and they're not really worth necessarily what we're worth.
We don't treat them the same way as a result of that.
But it's hard because who knows what's going on.
So just a quick elaboration on that,
the explaining that you're intelligent,
the explaining the reasoning that went into the prediction
is not some kind of mathematical proof.
If we look at humans, look at political debates
and discourse on Twitter,
it's mostly just telling stories.
So your task is not to tell an accurate depiction
of how you reason, but to tell a story real or not
that convinces me that there was a mechanism
by which you...
Well, ultimately, that's what a proof is.
I mean, even a mathematical proof is that
because ultimately the other mathematicians
have to be convinced by your proof, otherwise.
In fact, there have been...
That's the metric of success, yeah.
There have been several proofs out there
where mathematicians would study for a long time
before they were convinced that it actually proved anything.
You never know if it proved anything
until the community of mathematicians decided that it did.
So I mean, but it's a real thing.
And that's sort of the point, right?
Is that ultimately, this notion of understanding us,
understanding something is ultimately a social concept.
In other words, I have to convince enough people
that I did this in a reasonable way.
I could do this in a way that other people
can understand and replicate and that it makes sense to them.
So our human intelligence is bound together in that way.
We're bound up in that sense.
We sort of never really get away with it
until we can sort of convince others
that our thinking process makes sense.
So do you think the general question of intelligence
is then also a social construct?
So if we ask questions
of an artificial intelligence system,
is this system intelligent?
The answer will ultimately be a socially constructed...
I think so I think I'm making two statements.
I'm saying we can try to define intelligence
in a super objective way that says, here's this data.
I want to predict this type of thing, learn this function,
and then if you get it right, often enough,
we consider you intelligent.
But that's more like a subordinate.
I think it is, it doesn't mean it's not useful.
It could be incredibly useful.
It could be solving a problem we can't otherwise solve
and can solve it more reliably than we can.
But then there's this notion of can humans take responsibility
for the decision that you're making?
Can we make those decisions ourselves?
Can we relate to the process that you're going through?
And now you as an agent, whether you're a machine
or another human, frankly, are now obliged
to make me understand how it is that you're arriving
at that answer and allow me, me or obviously a community
or a judge of people, to decide whether or not
that makes sense.
And by the way, that happens with humans as well.
You're sitting down with your staff, for example,
and you ask for suggestions about what to do next.
And someone says, well, I think you should buy, and I
should think you should buy this much, or have or sell
or whatever it is, or I think you should launch the product
today or tomorrow or launch this product versus that product,
whatever the decision may be.
And you ask why.
And the person said, I just have a good feeling about it.
And you're not very satisfied.
Now, that person could be, you might say, well, you've
been right before, but I'm going to put the company on the line.
Can you explain to me why I should believe this?
And that explanation may have nothing to do with the truth.
You just have to convince the other person.
You'll still be wrong.
You just got to be convincing.
But it's ultimately got to be convincing.
And that's why I'm saying we're bound together.
Our intelligences are bound together in that sense.
We have to understand each other.
And if, for example, you're giving me an explanation,
and this is a very important point,
you're giving me an explanation.
And I'm not good at reasoning well and being objective
and following logical paths and consistent paths.
And I'm not good at measuring and computing probabilities
across those paths.
What happens is, collectively, we're not going to do well.
How hard is that problem, the second one?
So I think we'll talk quite a bit about the first
on a specific objective metric benchmark performing well.
But being able to explain the steps, the reasoning,
how hard is that problem?
I think that's very hard.
I mean, I think that's, well, it's hard for humans.
The thing that's hard for humans, as you know,
may not necessarily be hard for computers and vice versa.
So sorry.
So how hard is that problem for computers?
I think it's hard for computers.
And the reason why I related to saying that it's also
hard for humans is because I think when we step back
and we say we want to design computers to do that,
one of the things we have to recognize
is we're not sure how to do it well.
I'm not sure we have a recipe for that.
And even if you wanted to learn it,
it's not clear exactly what data we use
and what judgments we use to learn that well.
And so what I mean by that is, if you
look at the entire enterprise of science,
science is supposed to be at about objective reason.
So we think about, who's the most intelligent person
or group of people in the world?
Do we think about the savants who can close their eyes
and give you a number?
We think about the think tanks or the scientists
or the philosophers who kind of work through the details
and write the papers and come up with the thoughtful, logical
proves and use the scientific method.
And I think it's the latter.
And my point is that, how do you train someone to do that?
And that's what I mean by it's hard.
What's the process of training people to do that well?
That's a hard process.
We work as a society, we work pretty hard
to get other people to understand our thinking
and to convince them of things.
Now, we could wade them.
Obviously, we talked about this, like human flaws
or weaknesses, we can persuade them through emotional means.
But to get them to understand and connect to and follow
a logical argument is difficult.
We do it as scientists, we try to do it as journalists,
we try to do it as even artists in many forms,
as writers, as teachers.
We go through a fairly significant training process
to do that.
And then we could ask, well, why is that so hard?
But it's hard.
And for humans, it takes a lot of work.
And when we step back and say, well, how
do we get a machine to do that?
It's a vexing question.
How would you begin to try to solve that?
And maybe just a quick pause, because there's
an optimistic notion in the things you're describing,
which is being able to explain something through reason.
But if you look at algorithms that recommend things
that we look at next, whether it's Facebook, Google,
advertisement based companies, their goal
is to convince you to buy things based on anything.
So that could be reason, because the best of advertisement
is showing you things that you really do need
and explain why you need it.
But it could also be through emotional manipulation.
The algorithm that describes why a certain reason,
a certain decision was made.
How hard is it to do it through emotional manipulation?
And why is that a good or a bad thing?
So you've kind of focused on reason, logic, really
showing in a clear way why something is good.
One, is that even a thing that us humans do?
And two, how do you think of the difference in the reasoning
aspect and the emotional manipulation?
So you call it emotional manipulation,
but more objectively, it's essentially
saying there are certain features of things
that seem to attract your attention.
I mean, it kind of give you more of that stuff.
Manipulation is a bad word.
Yeah, I'm not saying it's good, right, or wrong.
It works to get your attention, and it
works to get you to buy stuff.
And when you think about algorithms
that look at the patterns of features
that you seem to be spending your money on,
and say, I'm going to give you something
with a similar pattern, I'm going to learn that function
because the objective is to get you to click on it,
or get you to buy it, or whatever it is.
I don't know.
I mean, it is what it is.
I mean, that's what the algorithm does.
You can argue whether it's good or bad.
It depends what your goal is.
I guess this seems to be very useful for convincing.
For telling us the story.
For convincing humans, it's good because, again, this
goes back to, what is the human behavior like?
What does the human brain respond to things?
I think there's a more optimistic view of that, too,
which is that if you're searching
for certain kinds of things, you've already
reasoned that you need them.
And these algorithms are saying, look, that's up to you.
The reason whether you need something or not, that's your job.
You may have an unhealthy addiction to this stuff,
or you may have a reasoned and thoughtful explanation
for why it's important to you.
And the algorithms are saying, hey, that's like whatever.
Like, that's your problem.
All I know is you're buying stuff like that.
You're interested in stuff like that.
It could be a bad reason.
It could be a good reason.
That's up to you.
I'm going to show you more of that stuff.
And I think that it's not good or bad.
It's not reasoned or not reasoned.
And the algorithm is doing what it does,
which is saying, you seem to be interested in this.
I'm going to show you more of that stuff.
And I think we're seeing this not just in buying stuff,
but even in social media.
You're reading this kind of stuff.
I'm not judging on whether it's good or bad.
I'm not reasoning at all.
I'm just saying, I'm going to show you other stuff
with similar features.
And that's it.
And I wash my hands from it.
And I say, that's all that's going on.
People are so harsh on AI systems.
So one, the bar of performance is extremely high.
And yet, we also ask them, in the case of social media,
to help find the better angels of our nature
and help make a better society.
So what do you think about the role of AI?
So that's, I agree with you.
That's the interesting dichotomy, right?
Because on one hand, we're sitting there
and we're sort of doing the easy part, which
is finding the patterns.
We're not building a, the system's not building a theory
that is consumable and understandable
to other humans that can be explained and justified.
And so on one hand, to say, oh, AI is doing this.
Why isn't doing this other thing?
Well, this other thing is a lot harder.
And it's interesting to think about why it's harder.
And because you're interpreting the data
in the context of prior models, in other words,
understandings of what's important in the world,
what's not important.
What are all the other abstract features
that drive our decision making?
What's sensible, what's not sensible, what's good,
what's bad, what's moral, what's valuable, what isn't?
Where is that stuff?
No one's applying the interpretation.
So when I see you clicking on a bunch of stuff
and I look at these simple features, the raw features,
the features that are there in the data,
like what words are being used, or how long the material is,
or other very superficial features,
what colors are being used in the material.
Like I don't know why you're clicking on this stuff
you're clicking, or if it's products, what the price is,
or what the categories and stuff like that.
And I just feed you more of the same stuff.
That's very different than kind of getting in there
and saying, what does this mean?
The stuff you're reading, like why are you reading it?
What assumptions are you bringing to the table?
Are those assumptions sensible?
Does the material make any sense?
Does it lead you to thoughtful, good conclusions?
Again, there's interpretation and judgment involved
in that process that isn't really happening in the AI today.
That's harder because you have to start getting
at the meaning of the stuff of the content.
You have to get at how humans interpret the content
relative to their value system and deeper thought processes.
So that's what meaning means, is not just some kind of deep,
timeless, semantic thing that the statement represents,
but also how a large number of people
are likely to interpret.
So it's, again, even meaning is a social construct.
So you have to try to predict how most people would
understand this kind of statement.
Yeah, meaning is often relative,
but meaning implies that the connections go beneath
the surface of the artifacts.
If I show you a painting, it's a bunch of colors on a canvas,
what does it mean to you?
And it may mean different things to different people
because of their different experiences.
It may mean something even different to the artist
who painted it.
As we try to get more rigorous with our communication,
we try to really nail down that meaning.
So we go from abstract art to precise mathematics,
precise engineering drawings, and things like that.
We're really trying to say, I want
to narrow that space of possible interpretations
because the precision of the communication
ends up becoming more and more important.
And so that means that I have to specify,
and I think that's why this becomes really hard.
Because if I'm just showing you an artifact
and you're looking at it superficially,
whether it's a bunch of words on a page,
or whether it's brushstrokes on a canvas
or pixels on a photograph, you can sit there
and you can interpret lots of different ways
at many, many different levels.
But when I want to align our understanding of that,
I have to specify a lot more stuff that's actually not
directly in the artifact.
Now, I have to say, well, how are you
interpreting this image and that image?
And what about the colors?
And what do they mean to you?
What perspective are you bringing to the table?
What are your prior experiences with those artifacts?
What are your fundamental assumptions and values?
What is your ability to kind of reason
to chain together logical implication
as you're sitting there and saying, well, if this is
the case, then I would conclude this.
And if that's the case, then I would conclude that.
So your reasoning processes and how they work,
your prior models and what they are,
your values and your assumptions,
all those things now come together into the interpretation.
Getting and thinking of that is hard.
And yet humans are able to intuit some of that
without any pre.
Because they have the shared experience.
And we're not talking about shared,
two people having shared experience, as a society.
That's correct.
We have the shared experience.
And we have similar brains.
So we tend to, in other words,
part of our shared experiences are shared local experience.
Like we may live in the same culture,
we may live in the same society.
And therefore we have similar educations.
We have similar, what we like to call prior models
about the word prior experiences.
And we use that as a, think of it as a wide collection
of interrelated variables.
And they're all bound to similar things.
And so we take that as our background
and we start interpreting things similarly.
But as humans we have a lot of shared experience.
We do have similar brains, similar goals,
similar emotions under similar circumstances.
Because we're both humans.
So now one of the early questions you asked,
how is biological and computer information systems
fundamentally different?
Well, one is humans come with a lot of pre programmed stuff.
A ton of programmed stuff.
And they're able to communicate
because they have a lot of,
because they share that stuff.
Do you think that shared knowledge,
if we can maybe escape the hardware question,
how much is encoded in the hardware?
Just the shared knowledge in the software,
the history of the many centuries of wars
and so on that came to today, that shared knowledge.
How hard is it to encode?
Do you have a hope?
Can you speak to how hard is it to encode that knowledge
systematically in a way that could be used by a computer?
So I think it is possible to learn for a machine,
to program a machine, to acquire that knowledge
with a similar foundation.
In other words, a similar interpretive foundation
for processing that knowledge.
What do you mean by that?
So in other words, we view the world in a particular way.
And so in other words, we have, if you will, as humans,
we have a framework for interpreting the world around us.
So we have multiple frameworks
for interpreting the world around us.
But if you're interpreting, for example,
social political interactions,
you're thinking about whether there's people,
there's collections in groups of people,
they have goals,
goals are largely built around survival and quality of life.
There are fundamental economics around scarcity of resources.
And when humans come and start interpreting a situation
like that, because you brought up historical events,
they start interpreting situations like that.
They apply a lot of this,
a lot of this fundamental framework for interpreting that.
Well, who are the people?
What were their goals?
What reasons did they have?
How much power influence did they have over the other?
Like this fundamental substrate, if you will,
for interpreting and reasoning about that.
So I think it is possible to imbue a computer
with that stuff that humans take for granted
when they go and sit down and try to interpret things.
And then with that foundation, they acquire,
they start acquiring the details,
the specifics and a given situation,
are then able to interpret it with regards to that framework.
And then given that interpretation,
they can do what they can predict.
But not only can they predict,
they can predict now with an explanation
that can be given in those terms,
in the terms of that underlying framework
that most humans share.
Now you could find humans that come
and interpret events very differently than other humans
because they're like using a different framework.
The movie Matrix comes to mind
where they decided humans were really just batteries.
And that's how they interpreted the value of humans
as a source of electrical energy.
So, but I think that, for the most part,
we have a way of interpreting the events
or the social events around us
because we have this shared framework.
It comes from, again, the fact that we're similar beings
that have similar goals, similar emotions,
and we can make sense out of these.
These frameworks make sense to us.
So how much knowledge is there, do you think?
So you said it's possible.
It's tremendous amount of detailed knowledge in the world.
You can imagine effectively infinite number
of unique situations and unique configurations
of these things.
But the knowledge that you need,
what I referred to as like the frameworks,
for you need for interpreting them, I don't think.
I think that those are finite.
You think the frameworks are more important
than the bulk of the knowledge.
So like framing.
Yeah, because what the frameworks do
is they give you now the ability to interpret and reason.
And to interpret and reason it,
to interpret and reason over the specifics
in ways that other humans would understand.
What about the specifics?
Were you required the specifics by reading
and by talking to other people?
So I'm mostly actually just even,
if you can focus on even the beginning,
the common sense stuff,
the stuff that doesn't even require reading
or it almost requires playing around with the world
or something, just being able to sort of manipulate objects,
drink water and so on, all of that.
Every time we try to do that kind of thing
in robotics or AI, it seems to be like an onion.
You seem to realize how much knowledge is really required
to perform even some of these basic tasks.
Do you have that sense as well?
And so how do we get all those details?
Are they written down somewhere?
Do they have to be learned through experience?
So I think when you're talking about sort of the physics,
the basic physics around us,
for example, acquiring information
about acquiring how that works.
Yeah, I think there's a combination of things going on.
I think there's a combination of things going on.
I think there is like fundamental pattern matching
like what we were talking about before,
where you see enough examples,
enough data about something you start assuming that
and with similar input,
I'm gonna predict similar outputs.
You don't can't necessarily explain it at all.
You may learn very quickly that when you let something go,
it falls to the ground.
That's such a...
But you can't necessarily explain that.
But that's such a deep idea
that if you let something go, like the idea of gravity.
I mean, people are letting things go and counting
on them falling well before they understood gravity.
But that seems to be, that's exactly what I mean,
is before you take a physics class
or study anything about Newton,
just the idea that stuff falls to the ground
and then you'd be able to generalize
that all kinds of stuff falls to the ground.
It just seems like a non, if without encoding it,
like hard coding it in,
it seems like a difficult thing to pick up.
It seems like you have to have a lot of different knowledge
to be able to integrate that into the framework,
sort of into everything else.
So both know that stuff falls to the ground
and start to reason about social political discourse.
So both like the very basic
and the high level reasoning decision making.
I guess my question is, how hard is this problem?
Sorry to linger on it because again,
and we'll get to it for sure as Watson with Jeopardy did
is take on a problem that's much more constrained
but has the same hugeness of scale,
at least from the outsider's perspective.
So I'm asking the general life question
of to be able to be an intelligent being
and reasoning in the world about both gravity
and politics, how hard is that problem?
So I think it's solvable.
Okay, now beautiful.
So what about time travel?
Okay, I'm not as convinced yet.
No, I think it is solvable.
I mean, I think that it's, first of all,
it's about getting machines to learn.
Learning is fundamental.
And I think we're already in a place
that we understand, for example,
how machines can learn in various ways.
Right now, our learning stuff is sort of primitive
in that we haven't sort of taught machines
to learn the frameworks.
We don't communicate our frameworks
because of how shared there are some cases we do,
but we don't annotate, if you will,
all the data in the world with the frameworks
that are inherent or underlying our understanding.
Instead, we just operate with the data.
So if we want to be able to reason over the data
in similar terms in the common frameworks,
we need to be able to teach the computer,
or at least we need to program the computer
to acquire, to have access to
and acquire, learn the frameworks as well
and connect the frameworks to the data.
I think this can be done
I think we can start, I think machine learning,
for example, with enough examples,
can start to learn these basic dynamics.
Will they relate them necessarily to gravity,
not unless they can also acquire those theories as well
and put the experiential knowledge
and connect it back to the theoretical knowledge.
I think if we think in terms of these class of architectures,
that are designed to both learn the specifics,
find the patterns, but also acquire the frameworks
and connect the data to the frameworks,
if we think in terms of robust architectures like this,
I think there is a path toward getting there.
In terms of encoding architectures like that,
do you think systems that are able to do this
will look like neural networks
or representing, if you look back to the 80s and 90s
of the expert systems,
so more like graphs, systems that are based in logic,
able to contain a large amount of knowledge
where the challenge was the automated acquisition
of that knowledge.
I guess the question is,
when you collect both the frameworks
and the knowledge from the data,
what do you think that thing will look like?
I think asking the question,
they look like neural networks is a bit of a red herring.
I think that they will certainly do inductive
or pattern match based reasoning.
I've already experimented with architectures
that combine both that use machine learning
and neural networks to learn certain classes of knowledge
in order to find repeated patterns
in order for it to make good inductive guesses,
but then ultimately to try to take those learnings
and marry them, in other words, connect them to frameworks
so that it can then reason over that
in terms other humans understand.
For example, at Elemental Cognition, we do both.
We have architectures that do both,
but both those things,
but also have a learning method
for acquiring the frameworks themselves
and saying, look, ultimately, I need to take this data.
I need to interpret it in the form of these frameworks
so they can reason over it.
There is a fundamental knowledge representation,
like you saying, like these graphs of logic, if you will.
There are also neural networks
that acquire certain class of information.
Then they align them with these frameworks,
but there's also a mechanism to acquire the frameworks themselves.
It seems like the idea of frameworks
requires some kind of collaboration with humans.
Absolutely.
Do you think of that collaboration as different?
Let's be clear.
Only for the express purpose
that you're designing machine,
you're designing an intelligence
that can ultimately communicate with humans
in the terms of frameworks
that help them understand things.
To be really clear,
you can independently create
a machine learning system
and intelligence
that I might call an alien intelligence
that does a better job than you would some things,
but can't explain the framework to you.
That doesn't mean it might be better than you at the thing.
It might be that you cannot comprehend the framework
that it may have created for itself
that is inexplicable to you.
That's a reality.
But you're more interested in a case where you can.
I am.
My sort of approach to AI
is because I've set the goal for myself.
I want machines to be able to ultimately communicate
understanding with humans.
I want them to be able to acquire and communicate.
Acquire knowledge from humans
and communicate knowledge to humans.
They should be using
what inductive
machine learning techniques are good at,
which is to observe
patterns of data,
whether it be in language or whether it be in images
or videos or whatever,
to acquire these patterns
to induce
the generalizations from those patterns,
but then ultimately to work with humans
to connect them to frameworks,
interpretations, if you will,
that ultimately make sense to humans.
Of course, the machine is going to have the strength
that it has, the richer and longer memory,
but it has
the more rigorous reasoning abilities,
the deeper reasoning abilities,
so it'll be an interesting
complementary relationship
between the human and the machine.
Do you think that ultimately needs explainability,
like a machine?
If you study, for example, Tesla autopilot a lot,
where humans,
I don't know if you've driven the vehicle
or are aware of...
You're basically
the human
and machine are working together there,
and the human is responsible for their own life
to monitor the system,
and the system fails
every few miles.
There's hundreds,
there's millions of those failures
and so that's like a moment
of interaction. Do you see...
That's exactly right. That's a moment of interaction
where
the machine has learned some stuff,
it has a failure,
somehow the failure is communicated,
the human is now filling in
the mistake, if you will, or maybe correcting
or doing something that is more successful in that case,
the computer takes that learning.
So I believe
that the collaboration between human
and machine,
that's sort of a primitive example
and sort of a more...
Another example is where the machine
is literally talking to you and saying,
look, I'm reading this thing.
I know that
the next word might be this or that,
but I don't really understand why.
I have my guess.
Can you help me understand the framework
that supports this
and then can kind of acquire that,
take that and reason about it and reuse it?
Try to understand something.
Not unlike
a human student might do.
I remember when my daughter was in first grade
and she had a
reading assignment about electricity
and
somewhere in the text it says
an electricity is produced by water
flowing over turbines or something like that.
And then there's a question that says,
well, how is the electricity created?
And so my daughter comes to me and says,
I mean, I could create it and produce
or kind of send it in this case.
So I can go back to the text and I can copy
by water flowing over turbines.
But I have no idea what that means.
Like, I don't know how to
interpret water flowing over turbines
and what electricity even is. I mean, I can get the
answer right by matching the text.
But I don't have any framework
for understanding what this means at all.
And framework, really,
I mean, it's a set of not to be mathematical,
but axioms of
ideas that you bring to the table
and interpreting stuff and then you build those up
somehow.
You build them up with the expectation that
there's a shared understanding of what
they are.
Yeah, it's the social that us humans
do you
have a sense that humans on earth
in general share a set of
like how many frameworks are there?
I mean, it depends on how
you bound them, right? So in other words, how
big or small like their individual scope.
But there's lots
and there are new ones. I think
the way I think about is kind of in a
layer. I think that the architect is being layered
in that there's a small
set of primitives
that allow you the foundation to build
frameworks. And then there may be
many frameworks, but you have the ability
to acquire them. And then you have the ability
to reuse them.
I mean, one of the most compelling ways of thinking
about this is reasoning by analogy
where I can say, oh, wow, I've learned something very
similar.
I never heard of this. I never heard of this
game soccer.
But if it's like basketball
in the sense that the goals like the hoop
and I have to get the ball in the hoop and I
have guards and I have this and I have that
like where does the
where the similarities and where the differences
and I have a foundation now for
interpreting this new information.
And then the different groups
like the millennials will have a framework
and then then
well, that you know, yeah, well
Democrats and Republicans
millennials, nobody wants that framework.
Well, I mean, I think
right. I mean, we're talking about political
and social ways of interpreting the world around
them. And I think these frameworks are
still largely, largely similar. I think they
differ in maybe what some fundamental
assumptions and values are.
Now, from a reasoning
perspective, like the ability to process the
framework, it might not be that
different. The implications of different
fundamental values or fundamental assumptions
in those framework
frameworks may reach very different conclusions.
So from
a social perspective, the conclusions
may be very different. From an intelligence
perspective, I
just followed where my assumptions took me.
Yeah, the process itself looks similar,
but that's a fascinating idea
that
frameworks really
help carve
how a statement will be interpreted.
I mean, having
a Democrat
and a Republican
framework
and read the exact same statement and the conclusions
that you derive will be totally different
from an AI perspective is fascinating.
What we would want out of the AI
is to be able to tell you
that this perspective, one
perspective, one set of assumptions is going to lead
you here, another set of assumptions is going to lead
you there.
And in fact, you know, to help people
reason and say, oh, I see where
our differences lie.
I have this fundamental belief about that.
Yeah, that's quite brilliant. From my perspective
NLP, there's this idea
that there's one way to really understand a statement.
But
there probably isn't. There's probably
an infinite number of ways to understand a statement.
Well, there's lots of different interpretations
and the broader
the content
that Richard is
and so, you know, you
and I can have very different experiences
with the same text obviously
and
if we're committed to understanding each other
we start
and that's the other important point like
if we're committed to understanding each other
we start decomposing
and breaking down our interpretation
towards more and more primitive components
until we get to that
point where we say, oh, I see why we disagree
and we try to
understand how fundamental that disagreement really is.
But that requires
a commitment to breaking down
that interpretation in terms of that
framework in a logical way.
Otherwise, you know, and this is why
I think of AIs as really
complimenting and helping human intelligence
to overcome some of its biases
and its predisposition
to be persuaded
by, you know,
by more shallow reasoning
in the sense that like we get over this idea
you know, I'm right
because I'm Republican or I'm right because I'm Democratic
and someone labeled this as Democratic point of view
or it has the following keywords in it
and if the machine can help us
break that argument down and say, wait a second,
you know, what do you really
think about this, right? So, essentially
holding us accountable
to doing more critical thinking.
We're not just sitting and thinking about that as fast
and that's, I love that.
I think that's really empowering use of AI
for the public discourse that's completely
disintegrating
currently as we
learn how to do it on social media.
So,
one of the greatest accomplishments
in the history of AI
is
Watson
competing in a game of Jeopardy against humans
and you were
a lead in that
a critical part of that.
Let's start at the very basics. What is the game of Jeopardy?
The game
for us humans, human versus human.
Right. So,
it's to take a
question
and answer it.
The game of Jeopardy. Well,
actually, it's the opposite.
Well, no, but it's not, right?
It's really not. It's really to get a question
and answer but it's what we call a factoid
question. So, this notion of like
it really relates to some fact that
a few people would argue
whether the facts are true or not. In fact,
what in Jeopardy kind of counts on the idea that
these statements
have factual answers
and
the idea is
to first of all determine whether or not you know
the answer which is sort of an interesting twist.
So, first of all, understand the question.
You have to understand the question. What is it
asking and that's a good point because
the questions are not
asked directly, right? They're all like
the way the questions are asked is
nonlinear. It's like
it's a little bit witty. It's a little bit
playful sometimes.
It's a little bit tricky.
Yeah, they're asking
exactly in numerous witty, tricky ways
exactly what
they're asking is not obvious. It takes
inexperienced humans a while to go,
what is it even asking? Right.
And it's sort of an interesting realization that
you have when somebody says, oh, what's the
Jeopardy! is a question answering show and they say, oh,
like I know a lot and then you read it and
you're still trying to process the question
and the champions have answered and moved on.
There are three questions ahead
by the time you figured out what the question
even meant. So, there's definitely
an ability there to just
parse out what the question even is.
So, that was certainly challenging. It's
interesting historically though if you look back
at the Jeopardy! games much earlier
you know, like 60s, 70s, that kind of thing.
The questions were much more direct.
They weren't quite like that.
They got sort of more and more interesting
the way they asked them that sort of got
more and more interesting and subtle
and nuanced and humorous and
witty over time which really
required the human to kind of make
the right connections in figuring out what the question
was even asking. So, yeah,
you have to figure out the questions even asking.
Then you have to
determine whether or not you think you know the answer
and
because you have to buzz in really quickly
you sort of have to make that determination
as quickly as you possibly can
otherwise you lose the opportunity to buzz in.
Even before you really know
if you know the answer. I think a lot of humans
will assume they'll
look at it.
They'll process it very superficially. In other words,
what's the topic? What are some
keywords and just say do I know
this area or not before they actually
know the answer? Then they'll buzz
in and think about it.
It's interesting what humans do. Now some
people who know all things like
Ken Jennings or something or the more recent
Big Jeopardy! player
they'll just assume they know all the Jeopardy!
and they'll just suppose that.
Watson interestingly
didn't even come close to knowing all of
Jeopardy!
Even at the peak.
So, for example, we had this thing called Recall
which is how many
of all the Jeopardy! questions
how many could we even
find the right answer
for anywhere?
Can we come up with if we had
a big body of knowledge in the order of several
ways? I mean, from a web
scale was actually very small.
But from a book scale, I was talking about
millions of books.
Equally millions of books.
Cyclopedias, dictionaries, books.
It's still a ton of information.
I think it was only
85% was the answer anywhere to be found.
So you're
ready down at that level just
to get started.
And so it was important
to get a very
quick sense of do you think you know the right
answer to this question? So we had to compute that
confidence as quickly as we
possibly could. So in effect
we had to answer it.
And at least
spend some time essentially answering
it. And then judging
the confidence that we, you know, that
our answer was right. And then deciding
whether or not we were confident enough to buzz
in. And that would depend on what else
was going on in the game because it was a risk.
So like if you're really in a situation
where I have to take a guess, I have very little
to lose, then you'll buzz in with less
confidence. So that was a counter for
the financial standings of the different
competitors. Correct.
How much of the game was left, how much time
was left, where you were in the standing
and things like that. What, how many
hundreds of milliseconds that we're talking
about here? Do you have a sense of
what is... We targeted
what's the target? So
I mean we targeted answering
in under three seconds
and...
So the decision to
buzz in and then the actual
answering, are those two different
stages? Yeah, they were two different things. In fact, we
had multiple stages, whereas like we
would say let's estimate our confidence
which was sort of a shallow
answering process.
And then ultimately
decide to buzz in and then we may take another
second or something
to kind of go in there and
do that. But by
and large we're saying like we can't play the game.
We can't even
compete if we can't
on average answer these questions in around
three seconds or less. So you
stepped in, so there's this, there's these
three humans playing a game
and you stepped in with the idea that
IBM Watson would be one of, replace
one of the humans and compete against
two. Can you tell the story
of Watson taking
on this game? Sure.
Seems exceptionally difficult. Yeah.
So the story
was that
it was coming up I think to the 10 year anniversary
of Big Blue.
Deep Blue. IBM
wanted to do sort of another kind of
really fun challenge, public
challenge that can bring attention
to IBM research and the kind of the cool stuff
that we were doing.
I had been working in
AI at IBM for some time.
I had a team doing
what's called open domain
factoid question answering, which is
we're not going to tell you what the questions are.
We're not even going to tell you what they're about.
Can you go off and get accurate answers
to these questions?
And it was an area of
AI research that I was involved in.
And so it was a big, it was a very
specific passion of mine. Language understanding
had always been a passion of mine.
One sort of narrow slice on
whether or not you could do anything with language was
this notion of open domain and meaning I could
ask anything about anything. Factoid
meaning it essentially had an answer
and
being able to do that accurately and quickly.
So that was a research area that my team had already been
in. And so completely independently
several IBM
executives were like, what are we going to do?
What's the next cool thing to do?
And Ken Jennings was on his winning
streak. This was like whatever
was 2004, I think, was on his
winning streak. And someone
thought, hey, that would be really cool
if the computer can play Jeopardy.
And so this was like
in 2004, they were shopping this thing around
and everyone
was telling the research
execs, no way.
Like, this is crazy.
And we had some pretty senior people in the field
saying, no, this is crazy. And it would come across my
desk and I was like, but that's kind of what
I'm really interested in doing.
But there was
such this prevailing sense of this is
nuts, we're not going to risk IBM's reputation on
this, we're just not doing it. And this happened in
2004, it happened in 2005.
At the end of
2006,
it was coming around again
and I was coming off of a,
I was doing the open domain question answering
stuff, but I was coming off a couple other
projects. I had a lot more time
to put into this and I argued
that it could be done and I argued
it would be crazy not to do this.
Can I, you can be honest at this point.
So even though you argued for it,
what's the confidence that you had
yourself privately
that this could be done?
We just told the
story how you tell stories to convince others.
How confident were you? What was
your estimation of the problem
at that time? So I thought it was
possible and a lot of people
thought it was impossible. I thought it was possible.
The reason why I thought it was possible is
because I did some brief experimentation.
I knew a lot about how we were approaching
open domain factoid
question answering. We've been doing it for some years.
I looked at the Jafferty stuff.
I said this is going to be hard
for a lot of the points that
we mentioned earlier. Hard to interpret the question.
Hard to do it quickly enough. Hard
to compute an accurate confidence. None of this stuff
had been done well enough before.
But a lot of the technologies we're building with the kinds
of technologies that should work.
But more to the point
what was driving me was
I was an IBM research.
I was a senior leader in IBM research
and this is the kind of stuff we were supposed
to do.
We were supposed to take things
and say this is an active research
area.
It's our obligation
if we have the opportunity
to push it to the limits. And if it doesn't
work to understand more deeply
why we can't do it.
I was very committed to that notion
saying folks this is what we do.
It's crazy
not to do it. This is an active
research area. We've been in this for years.
Why wouldn't we take this grand challenge
and
push it as hard as we can.
At the very least we'd be able to come out and say
here's why this problem
is way hard.
Here's what we tried and here's how we failed.
I was very driven
as a scientist from that perspective
and then I also argued
based on
what we did a feasibility study.
Why I thought it was hard but possible
for us to take some sort of examples
of where it succeeded
where it failed, why it failed
and sort of a high level architectural approach
for why we should do it.
But for the most part at that point
the execs really were just looking for someone
crazy enough to say yes
because for several years at that point
everyone had said no.
I'm not willing to risk my reputation
and my career
on this thing.
Clearly you did not have such fears.
And yet
for what I understand
it was performing very poorly
in the beginning. So what were the
initial approaches and why did they fail?
Well, there were lots
of hard aspects to it.
One of the reasons why prior
approaches that we had worked
on in the past
failed was because
the questions were difficult
to interpret. What are you even asking for?
Very often
if the question was very direct
what city
even then it could be tricky
but what city
or what person
often when it would name it
very clearly you would know that.
And if there was just a small
set of them, in other words we're going to ask
about these five types.
It's going to be an answer
and the answer will be
a city in this state
or a city in this country. The answer will be
a person of this type
like an actor or whatever it is.
But turns out that in Jeopardy
there were like tens of thousands of these things
and it was a very, very long
tail.
Meaning it just went on and on
and so even if you focused on trying
to encode the types
at the very top like there's
five that were the most let's say five of the most frequent
you still cover a very small
range of the data. So you couldn't take
that approach of saying
I'm just going to try to collect facts
about these five
or ten types or twenty types or fifty types
or whatever. So
that was like one of the first things like
what do you do about that and so we came up
with an approach toward that
and the approach looked promising
and we continued to improve
our ability to handle
that problem throughout the project.
The other issue was that
right from the outside I said we're not
going to, I committed
to doing this in three to five years
so we did it in four
so I got lucky.
But one of the things that that putting that
stake in the ground
was I knew how hard the language
understanding problem was. I said we're not going to
actually understand
language to solve this problem.
We are not going to
interpret the question
and the domain of knowledge
that the question refers to and reason over
to that to answer these questions. Obviously
we're not going to be doing that. At the same time
simple search
wasn't good enough to
confidently answer with this
a single correct answer.
First of all it's like brilliant. It's such a great
mix of innovation in practical engineering
three, three, four, eight.
So you're not trying to solve the general
NLU problem. You're saying let's
solve this in any way possible.
Yeah, no I was committed to
saying look we're just solving the open
domain question answering problem.
We're using Jeopardy as a driver
for that. Hard enough. Big benchmark
exactly. And now
how do we do it?
We could just like whatever like just figure out what works
because I want to be able to go back to the academic
and scientific community and say here's what
we tried. Here's what worked. Here's what
didn't work. I don't want to go
in and say oh I only have
one technology. I have a hammer and I'm only going to use
this. I'm going to do whatever it takes. I'm like
let's think out of the box and do whatever it takes.
One and I also
there's another thing I believe. I believe
that the fundamental
NLP technologies and machine learning
technologies would be
would be adequate. And this was
an issue of how do we enhance
them? How do we integrate them?
How do we advance them?
So I had one researcher and came to me
who had been working on question answering with me for a very
long time
who had said we're going to need
Maxwell's equations for question answering.
And I said if we need
some fundamental formula that
breaks new ground and how we understand
language, we're screwed. We're
not going to get there from here.
I am not counting
my assumption is I'm not
counting on some brand new
invention. What I'm counting
on is the ability
to take everything that has done before
to figure out
an architecture on how to integrate
it well and then see where it
breaks and make the necessary
advances we need to make
until this thing works. Yeah. Push it
hard to see where it breaks and then patch
it up. I mean, that's how people change the world.
I mean, that's the Elon Musk approach with
rockets, SpaceX, that's the
Henry Ford and so on.
And I happen to be and in this case
I happen to be right, but like we didn't
know. Right. But you kind of have to
put a stake in terms of how you're going to run the project.
So yeah, and backtracking to
search. So if you
were to do, what's the brute force
solution? What would
you search over? So you have a question.
How would you search
the possible space of answers?
Look, web searches come a long way even since
then. But at the
time, like, you know, you first of
all, I mean, there are a couple other constraints
around the problems. Interesting. So
you couldn't go out to the web. You
couldn't search the Internet. In other
words, the AI experiment was
we want a self contained
device.
If the device is as big as a room, fine, it's as
big as a room, but we want a self
contained device, contained
device. You're not going out to the Internet.
You don't have a lifeline to anything.
So it had to kind of fit in a shoebox
if you will, or at least
size of a few refrigerators, whatever it might be.
See, but also
you couldn't just get out there. You couldn't go off
network, right, to kind of go. So
there was that limitation. But then
we did, but the basic thing was go
do a web search.
The problem was even when we went and did a
web search, I
don't remember exactly the numbers, but someone
in the order of 65% of the time,
the answer would be somewhere
in the top 10 or 20
documents. So first of
all, that's not even good enough to play Jeopardy.
In other words, even
if you could pull the, even if you could perfectly
pull the answer out of the top
20 documents, top 10 documents, whatever
it was, which we didn't know how to do.
But even if you could do that,
you'd be, and you knew it was right.
We had enough confidence in it, right?
You'd have to pull out the right answer. You'd have to
have confidence it was the right answer.
And then you'd have to do that fast enough to now go buzz
in. And you'd still only
get 65% of them right, which doesn't even
put you in the winner circle. Winner circle
you have to be up over 70.
And you have to do it really, and you have to do it really
quickly. But now the problem is,
well, even if I had
somewhere in the top 10 documents, how do I figure out
where in the top 10 documents that
answer is? And how do I compute
a confidence of all the possible candidates?
So it's not like I go in knowing
the right answer and have to pick it. I don't know
the right answer. I have a bunch of documents
somewhere in there's the right answer.
How do I, as a machine, go out and figure out
which one's right? And then how do I score
it? So,
and now how do I deal with the fact
that I can't actually go out to the web?
First of all, if you pause on that, just think
about it. If you could go to the web,
do you think that problem is
solvable? If you just pause on it?
Just thinking even beyond
jeopardy.
Do you think the problem of reading text
to find where the answer is?
Well, we solved that in some
definition of solved, given the jeopardy challenge.
How did you do it for jeopardy? So how
did you take a body
of work in a particular topic
and extract the key pieces of information?
So what, so, now, forgetting
about the huge volumes that are
on the web, right? So now we have to figure out
we did a lot of source research. In other words,
what body of knowledge
is going to be small enough but
broad enough to answer
jeopardy? And we ultimately did find
the body of knowledge that did that. I mean, it included
Wikipedia and a bunch of other stuff.
So, like, encyclopedia type of stuff? I don't know if you can
speak to it. Encyclopedia is different times of
semantic resources,
like WordNet and other types of semantic resources
like that, as well as, like, some web
crawls. In other words, where we went out
and took that content
and then expanded it based on producing
statistical, you know, statistically
producing seeds, using those
seeds for other searches
and then expanding that. So
using these, like, expansion techniques
we went out and had found enough content
and were like, okay, this is good. And even
up until the end, you know, we had
a threat of research that was always trying to figure
out what content could we
efficiently include. I mean, there's a lot of popular
content, like, what is the church lady?
Well, I think it was one of the, like,
what
where do you, I guess, that's probably
in encyclopedias. So, I guess,
but then we would
take that stuff and we would go out and we would
expand. In other words, we go find
other content that wasn't in the core
resources and expand it. You know,
the amount of content that grew it by an order of
magnitude, but still, again
from a web scale perspective, this is a very
small amount of content. It's very select.
We then took all that content,
we preanalyzed the crap out of it,
meaning we
parsed it, you know, broke it down
into all those individual words, and then we did
semantic, static and semantic
parses on it, you know, had computer
algorithms that annotated it, and
we indexed that in
a very rich and very fast
index.
So, we have a relatively huge amount of, you
know, let's say the equivalent of, for the sake of
argument, two to five million bucks, we've
now analyzed all that, blowing up its size
even more, because now we have all this metadata,
and then we richly indexed all of
that, and by the way,
in a giant in memory cache.
So, Watson did not go to disk.
So, the infrastructure component
there, if you could just speak to it, how tough
it, I mean, I know
2000, maybe this is
2008, 2009,
you know, that's
kind of a long time ago.
How hard is it to use multiple
machines? How hard is
the infrastructure component, the hardware component?
So, we used IBM hardware.
We had something like, I
forget exactly, but 2,000, close
to 3,000 cores
completely connected. So, we had a switch
where, you know, every CPU was connected
to every other CPU. And they were sharing memory in some kind of way.
Large, shared memory,
right? And all this data
was preanalyzed and
put into a very fast
indexing structure that
was all
in memory. And then
we took that question
we would analyze
the question. So, all the content
was now preanalyzed.
So, if I went
and tried to find a piece of content, it would
come back with all the metadata that we had
precomputed. How do you
shove that question?
How do you connect the big
stuff, the big knowledge base
of the metadata and that's indexed to
the simple little witty
confusing question?
Right. So, there
lies, you know, the Watson architecture.
So, we would take the question, we would
analyze the question. So, which
means that we would parse it
and interpret it a bunch of different ways. We'd try to
figure out what is it asking about. So, we
would come, we had
multiple strategies to kind of determine
what was it asking for.
That might be represented as a simple
string, a character string
or something we would connect back to
different semantic types that were from
existing resources. So, anyway,
the bottom line is we would do a bunch of analysis in the question.
And question analysis
had to finish and had to finish fast.
So, we do the question analysis
because then from the question analysis
we would now produce searches.
So, we would, and we
had built, using
open source search engines, we modified
them. We had a number of different
search engines we would use that had
different characteristics. We went in there
and engineered and modified those
search engines ultimately
to now take
our question analysis, produce multiple
queries based on different interpretations
of the question
and fire out a whole bunch of searches
in parallel.
And they would produce, they would come back
with passages.
So, these are passive search algorithms, they would
come back with passages. And so, now
let's say you had a thousand
passages. Now, for each passage
you parallelize again.
So, you went out and you
parallelize the search.
Each search would now come back
with a whole bunch of passages.
Maybe you had a total of a thousand
or five thousand whatever passages.
For each passage now, you'd go and
figure out whether or not there was a candidate,
we would call it candidate answer in there.
So, you had a whole bunch of other algorithms
that would find candidate answers.
Possible answers to the question.
And so, you had
candidate answers, called candidate answers
generators, the whole bunch of those.
So, for every one of these components
the team was constantly doing research
coming up better ways to generate
search queries from the questions, better ways
to analyze the question, better ways to
generate candidates. And speed, so better
is accuracy and
speed. Correct. So,
right, speed and accuracy for the most
part were separated.
We handle that sort of in separate ways, like I
was, purely on accuracy and
to an accuracy, are we ultimately getting more
questions and producing more accurate
confidences. And then a whole other team
that was constantly analyzing the workflow
to find the bottlenecks. And then figuring
out how to both parallelize and drive
the algorithm speed. But anyway, so
now think of it like you have this big fan
out now, right? Because you have
multiple queries, now you have
thousands of candidate answers.
For each candidate answer, you're going to score
it. So, you're going to use
all the data that built up, you're going to use
the question analysis,
you're going to use how the query was generated,
you're going to use the passage itself
and you're going to use the
candidate answer that was generated
and you're going to score that.
So, now we have
a group of researchers coming up with scores.
There are hundreds of different
scores. So, now you're getting a fan
out of it again from however many
candidate answers you have
to all the different scores.
So, if you have a 200 different scores
and you have 1,000 candidates, now you have
200,000 scores.
And so, now you've got to figure out
how do I now
rank these
answers based on the scores that
came back? And I want to rank
them based on the likelihood that they're a correct answer
to the question. So, every
score was its own research project.
What do you mean by score? So, is that the
annotation process of basically
a human being saying that this
answer has quality?
Think of it, if you want to think of it, what you're doing
you know, if you want to think about
what a human would be doing, a human would be looking at
a possible answer.
They'd be reading the
you know, Emily Dickinson. They'd be
reading the passage in which that occurred.
They'd be looking at the question
and they'd be making a decision of how
likely it is that Emily Dickinson
given this evidence in this passage
is the right answer to that question.
Got it. So, that's the annotation
task. That's the annotation
task. That's the scoring task.
So, but scoring implies 0 to 1
kind of continuous. That's right. You give it a 0 to 1 score.
Since it's not a binary. No.
You give it a score.
You give it a 0, yeah, exactly.
So, humans do give different scores so
you have to somehow normalize and all that kind of stuff
that deal with all that complexity. Depends on
what your strategy is. We both, we
could be relative to. It could be
we actually looked at the raw scores
as well, standardized scores because humans
are not involved in this.
Humans are not involved. Sorry. So, I'm
misunderstanding the process here. There's
passages. Where is
the ground truth coming from?
Grand truth is only the answers to the questions.
So, it's
end to end. It's end to end.
So, I was always
driving end to end performance. It was a very
interesting. Wow. A very interesting
engineering
approach and ultimately
scientific research approach. Always driving
now. That's not to say
we
wouldn't make
hypotheses that
individual component performance
was related in some way
to end to end performance. Of course we would
because people would have to
build individual components. But
ultimately to get your component integrated
into the system, you have to show impact
on end to end performance. Question
answering performance. So, there's many very
smart people working on this and they're basically
trying to sell
their ideas as a component that should be part
of the system. That's right. And
they would do research on their component
and they would say things like
I'm going to improve
this as a candidate generator.
I'm going to improve this as a
question score or as a passive
score. I'm going to improve this
or as a parser. And I
can improve it by 2%
on its component metric.
Like a better parse or better
candidate or a better type estimation
whatever it is. And then I would say
I need to understand how
the improvement on that component metric
is going to affect the end to end performance.
If you can't estimate that
and can't do experiments to demonstrate that
it doesn't get in.
That's like the best
run AI project I've ever
heard. That's awesome. Okay.
What breakthrough would
you say? Like I'm sure there's a lot
of day to day breakthroughs but was there like a breakthrough
that really helped improve performance?
Like wait, were people
began to believe?
Or is it just a gradual process? Well, I think
it was a gradual process but
one of the things that I think
gave people confidence
that we can get there was that
as we follow this
as we follow this procedure of
different ideas, build different components
plug them into the architecture, run the system
see how we do
the error analysis, start off
new research projects to improve things
and
the very important idea
that the individual
component
work
did not have to deeply understand
everything that was going on with every other component.
And this is where
we leveraged machine learning in a very
important way.
So while individual components could be
statistically driven machine learning components
some of them were heuristic, some of them were
machine learning components, the system has
a whole combined all the scores
using machine learning.
This was critical
because that way you can divide
and conquer. So you can say
okay, you work on your candidate generator
or you work on this approach to answer scoring
you work on this approach to type scoring
you work on this approach to
passage search or to passage selection
and so forth.
But when we just plug it in
and we had enough training
data to say now we can
train and figure out how do we
weigh all the scores
relative to each other
based on predicting
the outcome which is right or wrong on
jeopardy. And we had enough training data
to do that. So this
enabled people to work
independently and to let the machine
learning do the integration.
Beautiful. So the machine learning
is doing the fusion and then it's a human
orchestrated ensemble
with different approaches.
That's great.
Still impressive that you were able to get it
done in a few years.
That's not obvious to me
that it's doable if I just put myself
in that mindset.
But when you look back at the jeopardy challenge
again when you're looking up at the stars
what are you most proud of?
It's looking back at those days.
I'm most proud of
my commitment
and my team's commitment
to be true to the science.
To not be afraid
to fail.
It's beautiful because there's so much pressure
because it is a public event.
It is a public show
that you were dedicated to the idea.
That's right.
Do you think it was a success?
In the eyes of the world it was a success.
By your I'm sure exceptionally high standards
is there something you regret you would do
differently?
It was a success.
It was a success for our goal.
Our goal was to
build the most advanced
open domain question answering system.
We went back
to the old problems that we used to try
to solve and we did
dramatically better on all of them
as well as we beat jeopardy.
So we won the jeopardy.
So it was a success.
I worry that the
world would not understand it as a success
because
it came down to only one game and I knew
statistically speaking this can be a huge
technical success and we could still lose that
one game and that's a whole other theme
of the journey.
But it was a success.
It was not a success
in natural language understanding
but that was not the goal.
I would argue
I understand what you're saying
in terms of the science
but I would argue that
the inspiration of it
not a success in terms of solving
natural language understanding.
It was a success of being an inspiration
to future challenges.
Absolutely.
To drive future efforts.
What's the difference between how human being
compete in jeopardy
and how Watson does it.
That's important in terms of intelligence.
That actually came up very early
on in the project also.
In fact I had people who wanted to be on the project
who were
early on who approached me
once I committed to do it
I wanted to think about
how humans do it and they were
from a cognition perspective
like human cognition and how that should play.
And I would not
take them on the project because
another assumption
or another state I put in the ground
was I don't really care how humans do this.
At least in the context of this project.
I need to build in the context of this project
in NLU
and in building an AI that understands
how it needs to ultimately communicate
with humans, I very much care.
So it wasn't that
I didn't care
in general.
In fact as an AI scientist
I care a lot about that.
But I'm also a practical engineer
and I committed to getting this thing done
and I wasn't going to get distracted
I had to kind of
say like if I'm going to get this done
I'm going to chart this path and this path says
we're going to engineer a machine
that's going to get this thing done
and we know what
search and NLP can do
we have to build on that foundation
if I come in and take
a different approach and start wondering about
how the human mind might or might not do this
I'm not going to get there from here
in the time frame.
I think that's a great way to lead the team.
But now
there's done and there's one
when you look back, analyze
what's the difference actually.
So I was a little bit surprised actually
to discover
over time as this would come up
from time to time and we'd reflect on it
that
and talking to Ken Jennings a little bit
and hearing Ken Jennings talk about
how he answered questions
that it might have been closer to the way humans
answer questions than I might have imagined
previously.
Because humans are probably in the game of Jeopardy
at the level of Ken Jennings
are probably also
cheating their way
to winning, right?
Well, they're doing shallow analysis.
They're doing the fastest possible.
They're doing shallow analysis.
So they are
very quickly analyzing the question
and coming up with some
key vectors or cues if you will
and they're taking those cues
and very quickly going through
their library of stuff
not deeply reasoning about what's going on
and then
lots of different
what we call these scores
what's kind of score
in a very shallow way
and then say, oh, boom, that's what it is.
And so it's interesting
as we reflected on that
we may be doing something that's not too far off
from the way humans do it
but we certainly
didn't approach it by saying,
you know, how would a human do this?
Now, in elemental cognition
like the project I'm leading now
we ask those questions all the time
because ultimately
we're trying to do something that
is to make the intelligence of the machine
and the intelligence of the human very compatible.
Well, compatible in the sense
they can communicate with one another
and they can reason
with this shared understanding.
So how they think about things
answers, how they build explanations
becomes a very important question to consider.
So what's the difference
between this
open domain
but cold
constructed question answering
of Jeopardy
and more
something that requires understanding
for shared communication with humans and machines?
Yeah, well, this goes back
to the interpretation
of what we were talking about before.
Jeopardy, the system is not
trying to interpret the question
and it's not interpreting the content
that's reusing with regard to any particular
framework. I mean it is
parsing it and parsing the content
and using grammatical cues and stuff like that.
So if you think of grammar as a human
framework in some sense it has that
but when you get into the richer
semantic frameworks,
what do people, how do they think, what motivates them,
what are the events that are
occurring and why they're occurring and what causes
what else to happen and
where are things in time and space
and when you start to think about
how humans formulate
and structure the knowledge that they acquire in their head
and wasn't doing any of that.
What do you think are the
essential challenges
of free flowing
communication, free flowing dialogue
versus question answering
even with a framework, with the
interpretation dialogue?
Yep. Do you see
free flowing dialogue
as
fundamentally more difficult
than question answering even with
shared
interpretation? So dialogue
is important in a number of different ways.
I mean it's a challenge. So first of all
when I think about the machine
that understands language
and ultimately can reason
in an objective way
that can take the
information that it perceives through language
or other means and connect it back
to these frameworks, reason
and explain itself
that system ultimately needs
to be able to talk to humans, right?
It needs to be able to interact with humans
so in some sense it needs to dialogue.
That doesn't mean that
sometimes
people talk about dialogue and they think
how do humans
talk to each other
in a casual conversation
and you could mimic casual conversations.
We're not trying to mimic casual
conversations. We're really trying
to produce a machine
whose goal is to help you
think and help you reason
about your answers and explain why.
So instead of like talking to your
friend down the street about having
a small talk conversation with your friend
down the street, this is more about
like you would be communicating to the computer
on Star Trek where
what do you want to think about?
What do you want to reason about? I'm going to tell you the information I have
and I'm going to have to summarize it. I'm going to ask you questions
and you're going to answer those questions.
I'm going to go back and forth with you.
I'm going to figure out what your mental model is.
I'm going to now relate that
to the information I have and present it to you
in a way that you can understand
and then we can ask follow up questions.
So it's that type of dialogue
that you want to construct.
It's more structured.
It's more goal oriented
and fluid.
In other words, it can't
it has to be engaging and fluid.
It has to be productive
and not distracting.
So there has to be a model
of, in other words, the machine has to have
a model of how humans
think through things
and discuss them.
So basically a productive, rich
conversation
unlike this podcast
what I'd like to think
it's more similar to this podcast.
I was just joking.
I'll ask you about humor as well, actually.
But
what's the hardest part of that
because it seems we're quite far away
as a community
from that still to be
able to. So one is having a shared
understanding.
I think a lot of the stuff you said with frameworks
is quite brilliant.
But just
creating a smooth discourse
feels
clunky right now.
Which aspects of this whole
problem that you just specified
of having a productive
conversation is the hardest
or maybe
maybe any
aspect of it you can comment on because it's so shrouded
in mystery.
So I think to do this you kind of have to
be creative in the following
sense.
So how to do this is purely a machine
learning approach. And someone said
learn how to have a
good, fluent, structured
knowledge acquisition conversation.
I'd go out
and say okay I have to collect a bunch of data
of people doing that. People reasoning
well
having a good structured
conversation that both acquires
knowledge efficiently as well as
produces answers and explanations as part of
the process.
And you struggle
to collect the data
because I don't know how much data
is like that.
There's one
there's a humorous comment around the lack of
rational discourse but also
even if it's out there
say it was out there how do you
actually
successful example.
So I think any problem like this
where you don't have
enough data to represent
the phenomenon you want to learn.
In other words, if you have enough data
you could potentially learn the pattern.
In an example like this it's hard to do.
This is sort of a human
sort of thing to do. What recently came
out at IBM was the debate or project
interest thing. Because now you do
have these structured dialogues, these debate
things where they did
use machine learning techniques to
generate these debates.
Dialogues are a little bit
tougher in my opinion than
generating a structured argument
where you have lots of other structured
arguments like this. You could potentially annotate
that data and you could say this is a good response
a bad response in a particular domain.
Here
I have to be responsive and I have to be
opportunistic
with regard to what is the human saying
so I'm goal oriented
and saying I want to solve the problem
I want to acquire the knowledge necessary. But I also
have to be opportunistic and responsive
to what the human is saying.
So I think that it's not clear
that we could just train on the body of data
to do this. But we
could bootstrap it. In other words we can be creative
and we could say what do we think
what do we think the structure of a good
dialogue is that does this well
and we can start to create that
if we can create
that more programmatically
at least to get this process started
and I can
create a tool that now engages humans effectively
I could start both
I could start generating data
I could start the human learning process
and I can update my machine
but I could also start the automatic learning process
as well.
But I have to understand what features to even learn over
so I have to bootstrap the process
a little bit first.
And that's a creative design task
that I could then use
as input
into a more automatic learning task.
Some creativity in
bootstrapping. What elements
of a conversation do you think
you would like to see?
So one of the benchmarks
for me is humor.
That seems to be one of the hardest
and to me the biggest contrast
is Watson.
So one of the greatest
comedy sketches of all time
is the SNL celebrity
Jeopardy
with Alex Rebecca and
John Connery and Bert Reynolds
and so on
with John Connery commentating
on Alex Rebecca's mother a lot.
And I think all of them
are in the negative point that's why.
So they're clearly all losing
in terms of the game of Jeopardy
but they're winning in terms of comedy.
So what do you think
about humor in this whole interaction
in the dialogue
that's productive?
Or even just whatever
what humor represents to me is
the same
idea that you're saying about framework
because humor only exists within a particular
human framework. So what do you think
about humor? What do you think about things
like humor that connect to the kind of creativity
you mentioned that's needed?
I think there's a couple of things going on there.
So I sort of feel like
and I might be too optimistic
this way but I think that
there are, we did
a little bit about with this
with puns in Jeopardy.
We literally sat down and said
how do puns work?
And it's like word play
and you could formalize these things.
So I think there's a lot aspects of humor
that you could formalize.
You could also learn humor. You could just say
what do people laugh at.
And if you have enough data to represent
the phenomenon, you might be able to
weigh the features and figure out
what humans find funny and what they don't find funny.
The machine might not be able to explain
why you might want to get funny
unless we sit back and think about that
more formally. I think, again,
I think you do a combination of both.
And I'm always a big proponent of that.
I think robust architectures and approaches
are always a little bit of a combination of
us reflecting and being creative about
how things are structured, how to formalize them
and then taking advantage of large data
and doing learning and figuring out how to combine
these two approaches.
I think there's another aspect to humor though
which goes to the idea that
I feel like I can relate to the person
telling the story.
And I think that's
an interesting theme
in the whole AI theme
which is, do I
feel differently when I know it's a robot?
And
when I imagine
that the robot is not conscious the way I'm
conscious, when I imagine
the robot does not actually have the experiences
that I experience, do I find
it funny?
Or do, because it's not as related,
I don't imagine
that the person is relating it to it the way I relate to it.
I think this also
you see this in
the arts and in entertainment where
like, you know, sometimes you have
savants who are remarkable at a thing
whether it's sculpture, it's music or whatever.
But the people who get the most attention
are the people who can
evoke
a similar emotional response
who can get you to
emote, right?
So the way they are, in other words, who can
basically make the connection
from the artifact, from the music
or the painting of the sculpture
to the emotion and get you
to share that emotion with them.
And that's when it becomes compelling.
So they're communicating at a whole different level.
They're just not communicating the artifact.
They're communicating their emotional response
to the artifact. And then you feel like,
oh wow, I can relate to that person.
I can connect to that person.
So I think humor has that
part as well.
So the idea that
you can connect to that person,
person being the critical thing.
But we're also
able to anthropomorphize objects
pretty, robots
and AI systems pretty well.
So we're almost looking
to make them human.
Maybe from your experience with Watson,
maybe you can comment on
did you consider that as part,
well, obviously the problem of Jeopardy
can require anthropomorphization.
But nevertheless...
Well, there was some interest in doing that
and that's another thing I didn't want to do.
Because I didn't want to distract from
the actual scientific task.
But you're absolutely right.
Humans do anthropomorphize
and without necessarily
a lot of work. I mean, you just put some eyes
in a couple of eyebrow movements
and you're getting humans to react emotionally.
And I think you can do that.
So I didn't mean to suggest
that
that connection
cannot be mimicked.
I think that connection can be mimicked
and can produce
that emotional response.
I just wonder though
if you're told
what's really going on,
if you know that
the machine is not conscious,
not having the same richness
of emotional reactions and understanding
that doesn't really share the understanding
but essentially just moving its eyebrow
or drooping its eyes or making them big
or whatever it's doing. Just getting the emotional
response. Will you still feel it?
Interesting. I think you probably would for a while.
And then when it becomes
more important that there's a deeper
shared understanding, it may run flat.
But I don't know. I'm...
I'm pretty confident that
the majority of the world
even if you tell them how it works...
It will not matter.
Especially if the machine
herself says
that she is conscious.
That's very possible.
So you, the scientist that made the machine
is saying
that this is how the algorithm works.
Everybody will just assume you're lying
and that there's a conscious being there.
You're deep into the science fiction genre now.
I don't think it's actually psychology.
I think it's not science fiction.
I think it's reality.
I think it's a really powerful one
that we'll have to be exploring
for the next few decades.
It's a very interesting
element of intelligence.
So what do you think...
We talked about social constructs of intelligence
and frameworks
in the way humans kind of
interpret information.
What do you think is a good test of intelligence
in your view?
So there's the Alan Turing
with the Turing test.
Watson accomplished something very impressive with Jeopardy.
What do you think is a test
that would impress the heck out of you
that you saw that a computer could do?
They would say this is
crossing a kind of
threshold
that gives me pause
in a good way.
My expectations
for AR are generally high.
What does high look like, by the way?
So not the threshold.
Test is a threshold.
What do you think is the destination?
What do you think is the ceiling?
I think
machines will, in many measures,
will be better than us,
will become more effective.
In other words, better predictors
about a lot of things
than ultimately we can do.
I think where they're going to struggle
is what we've talked about before,
which is
relating to communicating
with and understanding humans
in deeper ways.
So I think that's a key point.
You can create the super parrot.
What I mean by the super parrot is
given enough data, a machine can mimic
your emotional response, can even
generate language that will sound smart
and what someone else might say
under similar circumstances.
I would just pause on that.
That's the super parrot, right?
So given similar circumstances,
moves its faces
in similar ways,
changes its tone of voice in similar ways,
produces strings of language
that would similar that a human might say,
not necessarily
being able to produce a
logical interpretation or understanding
that would
ultimately satisfy
a critical interrogation
or a critical understanding.
I think you just described me
in a nutshell.
So I think philosophically
speaking, you could argue
that that's all we're doing as human beings
to a worse extent.
It's very possible humans
do behave that way too.
So upon deeper probing
and deeper interrogation, you may find out
that there isn't a shared understanding
because I think humans do both.
Humans are statistical language model machines
and they are capable reasoners.
They're both
and you don't know which is going on.
I think it's an interesting
problem
we talked earlier about like where we are
in our social and political landscape.
Can you distinguish
someone
who can string words together
and sound like they know what they're talking about
from someone who actually does?
Can you do that without dialogue?
With that interrogative or probing dialogue?
So it's interesting because humans are
really good at in their own mind
justifying or explaining what they hear
because they project
their understanding onto yours.
So you could say you could put together
a string of words
and someone will sit there and interpret it
in a way that's extremely bias
to the way they want to interpret it.
They want to assume you're an idiot and they'll interpret it one way.
They will assume you're a genius
and they'll interpret it another way that suits their needs.
So this is tricky business.
So I think to answer your question
as
AI gets better and better mimic
and we create the super parrots
we're challenged
just as we are challenged with humans.
Do you really know what you're talking about?
Do you have
a meaningful interpretation
a powerful
framework that you could reason over
and justify
your answers, justify
your predictions and your beliefs
why you think they make sense?
Can you convince me what the implications are?
So
can you reason intelligently
and make me believe
that those
the implications
of your prediction and so forth.
So what happens is it becomes reflective.
My standard for judging your intelligence
depends a lot on mine.
But you're saying
there should be a large group of people
with a certain standard of intelligence
to be convinced
by this particular
AI system
then there will pass.
There should be.
I think depending on the content
one of the problems we have there
is that if that large community of people
are not judging it
with regard to a rigorous standard
of objective logic and reason
you still have a problem
like masses of people can be
persuaded
to turn their brains off.
By the way, I have nothing against the one of you.
No, I don't know.
So you're
a part of one of the great
benchmarks, challenges
of AI history.
What do you think about
AlphaZero, OpenAI5,
AlphaStar accomplishments on video games
recently, which are also
I think
at least in the case of Go
with AlphaGo and AlphaZero playing Go
was a monumental accomplishment as well.
What are your thoughts about that challenge?
I think it was a giant landmark for AI.
I think it was phenomenal.
As one of those other things nobody thought
solving Go was going to be easy
because it's hard
for humans,
hard for humans to learn, hard for humans to excel at
and so it was
another measure of intelligence.
It's very cool.
I mean, it's very interesting
what they did.
I loved how they solved the data problem
which again, they bootstrapped it
and got the machine to play itself
to generate enough data to learn from.
I think that was brilliant. I think that was great.
And of course
the result speaks for itself.
I think it makes us think about
again, what's intelligence?
What aspects of intelligence are important?
Can the Go machine help
make me a better Go player?
Is it an alien intelligence?
Am I even capable of
like again, if we put in
very simple terms, it found the function.
It found the Go function.
Can I even comprehend the Go function?
Can I talk about the Go function?
Can I conceptualize the Go function like whatever it might be?
One of the interesting ideas
of that system is that it plays against itself.
But there's no human in the loop there.
Like you're saying, it could have
itself created
an alien intelligence.
Toward a goal.
Imagine you're sentencing, you're judging
you're sentencing people.
Or you're setting policy.
Or you're
making medical decisions.
And you can't explain.
You can't get anybody to understand
what you're doing or why.
So it's
an interesting dilemma
for the applications of
AI. Do we hold AI to
this
accountability that says,
humans have to be
when you take responsibility
for the
decision. In other words, can you
explain why you would do the thing?
Will you get up and speak
to other humans and convince them that this was
a smart decision? Is the AI
enabling you to do that?
Can you get behind the logic that was
made there?
Sorry to linger on this point
because it's a fascinating one.
It's a great goal for AI.
Do you think it's achievable
in many cases?
Okay, there's two possible worlds
that we have in the future.
One is where AI systems
do medical diagnosis or
things like that, or drive a car
without ever
explaining to you why
it fails when it does.
That's one possible world
we're okay with it. Or the other
where we are not okay with it and
we really hold back the technology
from getting too good before it gets
able to explain which of those worlds
are more likely, do you think, and
which are concerning to you or not?
I think the reality is it's going to be a mix.
I'm not sure I have a problem with
that. I think there are tasks that are perfectly
fine with
machines show a certain level
of performance and that level of performance
is already better than humans.
So, for example, I don't know that
I take driverless cars.
If driverless cars learn how to be more
effective drivers than humans but can't
explain what they're doing, but
bottom line, statistically speaking,
they're 10 times safer
than humans. I don't know that
I care.
I think when we have these edge cases
when something bad happens and we want
to decide who's liable for that thing
and who made that mistake and what do we do
about that? And I think in those edge cases
are interesting cases.
And now do we go to designers of the AI
and the AI says, I don't know, that's what it learned
to do and it says, well, you didn't train it
properly. You know, you were
negligent in the training data that you gave
that machine. Like, how do we drive down
the real level? So, I think those are
interesting questions.
So, the optimization problem there, sorry,
is to create an ass system that's able to
explain the lawyers away.
There you go.
I think that
is going to be interesting. I mean, I think this is where
technology and social discourse are going to get
like deeply intertwined
in how we start thinking about
problems, decisions and problems like that.
I think in other cases, it becomes more obvious
where
it's like
why did you decide to give that person
a longer sentence
or deny them
parole?
Again, policy decisions or
why did you pick that treatment? Like that treatment
ended up killing that guy. Like, why was that
a reasonable choice to make?
So,
and people are going to demand
explanations. Now, there's a reality
though here.
And the reality is that it's not,
I'm not sure humans are making
reasonable choices when they do these
things. They are using
statistical hunches,
biases, or even
systematically using
statistical averages to make cause.
And this is what happened. My dad, if you saw
the talk I gave about that, but
you know, I mean, they decided
that my father was brain dead.
He had went into cardiac arrest
and it took a long time
for the ambulance to get there and he wasn't not
resuscitated right away and so forth. And they came
and they told me he was brain dead and why
was he brain dead? Because essentially they gave me
a purely statistical argument
under these conditions with these four features
98% chance he's brain dead.
I said, but can you just tell me
not inductively, but deductively
go there and tell me his brain's not functioning
is the way for you to do that. And
the protocol
in response was, no, this is how we make this decision.
I said, this is inadequate for me.
I understand the statistics and
I don't know how, you know,
there's a 2% chance he's still alive. I just don't
know the specifics. I need the specifics
of this case
and I want the deductive logical argument
about why you actually know he's brain dead.
So I wouldn't sign that do not resuscitate.
And I don't know, it was like
they went through lots of procedures, a big long
story, but the bottom was a fascinating
story, by the way, but how I reasoned
and how the doctors reasoned through this whole process.
But I don't know, somewhere around
24 hours later or something, he was sitting up
in bed with zero brain damage.
What lessons do you draw from
that
story, that experience?
That the data that
the data that's being used to make statistical
inferences doesn't adequately
reflect the phenomenon. So in other words,
you're getting shit wrong, sorry,
you're getting stuff wrong
because your model
is not robust enough
and you might be
better off
not using statistical
inferences and statistical averages in certain cases
when you know the model is insufficient
and that you should be reasoning about the
specific case more logically
and more deductively
and hold yourself responsible and accountable
to doing that.
And perhaps
AI has a role to say the exact
thing that you just said, which is
perhaps this is a case
you should think for yourself.
You should reason deductively.
So it's hard because
it's hard to know
that.
You'd have to go back and you'd have to have enough
data to essentially say, and this goes back
to the case of how do we decide
whether AI is good enough to do a particular
task.
And regardless of whether or not
it produces an explanation.
So and
what standard do we hold
for that?
If you look more
broadly, for example,
as my father, as a medical
case,
the medical system ultimately
helped him a lot throughout his life.
Without it, he probably
would have died much sooner.
So overall sort of
work for him
in sort of a net kind of way.
Actually, I don't know
that's fair.
But it may be not in that particular case, but overall
the medical system overall
does more good than bad.
The medical system overall was doing
more good than bad. Now there's another argument
that suggests that there wasn't a case,
but for the sake of argument, let's say like
that's let's say a net positive.
And I think you have to sit there and take that
into consideration. Now you
look at a particular use case, like for example
making this decision.
Have you done enough studies
to know
how good that prediction really is?
Right.
And have you done enough studies to compare
it to say, well, what if we
what if we dug in
in a more direct
let's get the evidence, let's do
the deductive thing and not use statistics here.
How often would that have done better?
So you have to do
the studies to know how good the AI actually
is. And it's complicated
because it depends how fast you have to make the decision.
So if you have to make the decision super fast,
do you have no choice?
Right. If you have
more time, right, but if you're ready
to pull the plug,
and this is a lot of the argument that I had was a doctor,
I said, what's he going to do if you do it?
What's going to happen to him in that room
if you do it my way?
Well, he's going to die anyway.
So let's do it my way then.
I mean, it raises questions for our society
to struggle with as
the case with your father,
but also when things like race and gender
start coming into play, when
when judgments are
made based on things
that are
complicated in our society, at least
in discourse. And it starts
I think
I'm safe to say that most
of the violent crime is committed by males.
So if you discriminate based
with the male versus female
saying that if it's a male, more likely
to commit the crime. This is one of my
very positive
and optimistic views
of why
the study of artificial intelligence,
the process of thinking and reasoning,
logically and statistically
and how to combine them is so important
for the discourse today because it's causing
regardless of what
what state AI devices
are or not
it's causing this
dialogue to happen. This is one of the most
important dialogues that
in my view, the human species can have
right now, which is
how to think well.
How to reason
well, how to understand our
own
cognitive biases
and what to do about them.
That has got to be one of the most important
things we as
a species can be doing honestly.
We have created
an incredibly complex society.
We've created amazing
abilities to amplify
noise faster than we can
amplify signal.
We are challenged.
We are deeply, deeply challenged.
We have
big segments of the population getting hit with
enormous amounts of information.
Do they know how to do critical thinking?
Do they know how to objectively
reason? Do they understand
what they are doing, never mind
what their AI is doing?
This is such an important dialogue
to be having.
And
we are fundamentally
thinking can be and easily becomes
fundamentally bias.
And there are statistics
and we shouldn't blind us. We shouldn't
discard statistical inference.
But we should understand the nature
of statistical inference.
As a society,
we decide
to reject statistical
inference
to favor
understanding and
deciding on the individual.
Yes.
We consciously
reject that choice.
So even if the statistics said
even
if the statistics said
males are more likely to have
to be violent criminals, we still take
each person as an individual
and we treat them
based on the logic
and the knowledge of that
situation.
We purposefully and intentionally
reject
the statistical inference.
We do that
at a respect for the individual.
For the individual. And that requires reasoning
and thinking.
Looking forward, what grand challenges
would you like to see in the future?
Because
the Jeopardy Challenge
captivated the world.
AlphaGo, AlphaZero
captivated the world. DBLU, certainly beating
Kasparov,
Gary's bitterness aside
captivated the world.
What do you think
do you have ideas for next grand challenges for
future challenges of that?
Look, I mean, I think there are lots of
really great ideas for grand challenges.
I'm particularly
focused on one right now which is
can you
demonstrate that they understand, that they could
read and understand
that they can acquire these frameworks
and
reason and communicate with humans.
So it is kind of like the Turing task
but it's a little bit more demanding
than the Turing task. It's not enough
to convince me
that you might be human
because you can
pair it a conversation.
I think the standard
is a little bit higher.
For example,
the standard is higher
and I think one of the challenges
of devising this grand challenge
is that
we're not sure
what intelligence is.
We're not sure how to determine
whether or not two people
actually understand each other
and in what depth they understand it.
You know, to what depth they understand
each other. So
the challenge becomes something along the lines
of can you
satisfy me
that we have
a shared understanding.
So if I were to probe
and probe and you probe me,
can machines really
act like thought partners
where they can satisfy me
that we have
our understanding is shared enough
that we can collaborate
and produce answers together
and that they can help me explain
and justify those answers.
So maybe here's an idea.
We'll have AI system
run for president
and convince...
That's too easy.
We can convince the voters
that they should vote.
So like, I guess, what does
winning look like?
Again, that's why I think this is such a challenge
because we go back to
the emotional persuasion.
We go back to, you know,
now we're checking off
an aspect
of human cognition
that is in many ways
weak or flawed, right?
We're so easily manipulated.
We're on
for often the wrong reasons,
right? Not the reasons
that ultimately mattered us,
but the reasons that can easily persuade us.
I think we can be persuaded
to believe one thing or another
for reasons that ultimately
don't serve us well in the long term.
And a good benchmark
should not play with those
elements
of emotional manipulation.
I don't think so. And I think that's where
we set the higher standard
for ourselves.
This goes back to rationality
and it goes back to objective thinking.
Can you acquire information
and produce reasoned arguments
and to those reasons, arguments pass
a certain amount of muster?
And can you
acquire new knowledge?
For example,
I have acquired new knowledge.
Can you identify where it's
consistent or contradictory
with other things you've learned?
And can you explain that to me and get me to understand that?
So I think another way
to think about it perhaps
is can a machine teach you?
Can it help you?
Can it help you understand
something that you didn't really understand before?
Where
it's taking you through?
So you're not,
again, it's almost like, can it teach
you? Can it help you learn?
And
in an arbitrary space
so it can open those domain space.
So can you tell the machine, again, this
borrows from some science fictions, but
can you go off and learn about this
topic that I'd like to understand
better and then work with
me to help me understand it?
That's quite brilliant.
Well, the machine
that passes that kind of test,
do you think it would need to
have
self awareness or even consciousness?
What do you think about
consciousness and the importance of it?
Maybe in relation to
having a body,
having a presence,
an entity.
Do you think that's important?
People used to ask me if Watson was conscious
and I used to say,
are you conscious of what exactly?
I think maybe it depends
on what you're conscious of.
So
it's certainly
easy for it to answer questions about
it would be trivial to program it.
So to answer questions about whether or not
it was playing jeopardy. I mean, it could
certainly answer questions that would imply
that it was aware of things. Exactly.
What does it mean to be aware and what does it
mean to consciousness? It's sort of interesting.
I mean, I think that we differ from one
another based on what we're conscious
of.
We're conscious of consciousness in there.
Well, there's just areas.
It's not just degrees.
What are you aware of?
But nevertheless, there's a very subjective element
to our experience.
Let me even not talk about
consciousness. Let me talk about
another,
to me, really interesting topic of mortality.
Fear or mortality.
Watson, as far as
I could tell,
did not have a fear of death.
Certainly not.
Most humans
do.
Wasn't conscious of death.
It wasn't that.
So there's an element of finiteness
to our existence that I think
like we mentioned, survival
that adds to the whole thing.
I mean, consciousness is tied up with that.
That we are a thing.
It's a subjective thing
that ends.
And that seems to add a color
or motivations in a way that
seems to be fundamentally important
for intelligence.
Or at least the kind of human intelligence.
Well, I think for generating goals.
Again, I think you could have
an intelligence capability
and a capability to learn,
a capability to
predict.
But I think without
I mean, again, you get a
fear, but essentially without the goal
to survive.
You think you can just encode that
without having to really.
I think you can create a robot now
and you could say, you know,
plug it in and say,
protect your power source, you know,
and give it some capabilities and we'll sit there
and operate to try to protect this power source
and survive.
So I don't know that that's
philosophically a hard thing to demonstrate.
It sounds like a fairly easy thing to demonstrate
that you can give it that goal.
Will it come up with that goal by itself?
It's something
because I think as we touched on
intelligence is kind of like a social construct.
The
fact that a robot will be protecting
its power source
would add
depth
and grounding to its intelligence
in terms of
us being able to respect that.
I mean, ultimately, it boils down to us
acknowledging that it's intelligent
and the fact that it can die
I think is an important part of that.
The interesting thing to reflect on
is how trivial that would be
and I don't think if you knew how
trivial that was, you would associate
that with being intelligence.
I mean, I literally put in a statement of code
that says, you know, you have the following actions
you can take, you give it a bunch of actions
like, maybe you mount the laser
going on or you may
or you give the ability to scream
or screech or whatever.
And you know, and you say, you know,
you're power source threatened
and you could program that in
and, you know, you're going to
you're going to take these actions to protect it.
You know, you could teach it
train it on a bunch of things.
And now you can look at that and you can say,
well, you know, that's intelligence
because it's protecting its power source, maybe,
but that's again, this human bias
that says, the thing I identify
my intelligence and my conscious
so fundamentally with the desire
or at least the behavior is associated
with the desire to survive
that if I see another thing doing
that, I'm going to assume
it's intelligent.
What timeline
year will society have
something that would
that you would be comfortable
calling an artificial general intelligence system?
Well, what's your intuition?
Nobody can predict the future.
Certainly not the next few months
or 20 years away, but
what's your intuition? How far away are we?
I know.
It's hard to make these predictions.
I would be, you know, I would be guessing
and there's so many different variables
including just how much we want to invest
in it and how important it, you know,
and how important we think it is
what kind of investment we're willing to make
in it, what kind of talent
we end up bringing to the table, all, you know,
the incentive structure, all these things.
So I think it is possible
to do this sort of thing.
I think it's
I think trying to sort of
ignore many
of the variables and things like that.
Is it a 10 year thing? Is it 23?
It's probably closer to a 20 year thing, I guess.
But not several hundred years.
No, I don't think it's several hundred years.
I don't think it's several hundred years,
but again, so much depends
on how
committed we are
to investing and incentivizing this type of
work, this type of work.
And it's sort of interesting.
Like, I don't think it's obvious
how incentivized we are.
I think from a task
perspective,
you know, if we see business
opportunities to take
this technique or that technique to solve that problem,
I think that's the main driver for many
of these things.
From a general intelligence
thing, it's kind of an interesting question.
Are we really motivated to do that?
And like, we just
struggled ourselves right now to even define
what it is.
So it's hard to incentivize when we don't even know
what it is we're incentivized to create.
And if you said mimic a human intelligence,
I just think there are so many challenges
with the significance and meaning
of that, that there's not a clear
directive. There's no clear directive to do
precisely that thing.
So assistance in a larger and larger
number of tasks.
So being able to assist
and be able to operate my microwave
and making a grilled cheese sandwich.
I don't even know how to make one of those.
And then the same system would be doing the vacuum
cleaning. And then the same system
would be teaching
my kids that I don't have
math.
I think that when you get into
a general intelligence for
learning physical
tasks, and again, I want to go back
to your body question because I think your body question was interesting, but
you want
to go back to, you know, learning the abilities to
physical tasks, you might have
we might get, I imagine
in that time frame, we will get better and better
at learning these kinds of tasks, whether
it's mowing your lawn or driving a car
or whatever it is. I think we will get better
and better at that where it's learning how to make
predictions over large bodies of data. I think we're
going to continue to get better and better at that.
And
machines will out, you know, outpace humans
and a variety of those things.
The underlying mechanisms
for doing that
may be the same, meaning
that, you know, maybe these are deep nets,
there's infrastructure to train
them, reusable components
to get them to different
classes of tasks, and we get better
and better at building these kinds of machines.
You could see, argue that
the general learning infrastructure in there is
a form of a general type of
intelligence. I think
what starts getting harder
is this notion of
you know, can we
effectively communicate and understand and build
that shared understanding because of the
layers of interpretation that are required to do
that and the need for the machine
to be engaged with humans at that level
in a continuous
basis. So how do you get in there?
How do you get the machine in the game?
How do you get the machine in the intellectual
game?
To solve AGI, you probably
have to solve that problem. You have to get
the machine. So it's a little bit of a bootstrapping
thing. Can we get the machine engaged
in, you know, in the intellectual
game, but in
the intellectual dialogue
with the humans? Are the humans
sufficiently in intellectual dialogue with each other
to generate enough
data in this context?
And how do you bootstrap that? Because
every one of those conversations,
those intelligent interactions
require so much prior knowledge
that it's a challenge to bootstrap it.
So the question
is, and how committed
so I think that's possible, but
when I go back to, are we incentivized
to do that?
I know we're incentivized to do the former.
Are we incentivized to do the latter significantly
enough? Do people understand what the latter really
is well enough? Part of the
elemental cognition mission is to try
to articulate that better and better
through demonstrations and through trying to craft
these grand challenges and get
people to say, look, this is a class of intelligence.
This is a class of AI.
Do we want this?
What is the potential of this?
What are the business, what's the business potential?
What's the societal potential
to that? And to, you know, and to
build up that incentive system
around that?
Yeah, I think if people don't understand yet, I think they will.
I think there's a huge business potential
here. So it's exciting that you're working on it.
I kind of skipped over, but
I'm a huge fan of
physical presence of things.
Do you think
Watson had a body?
having a body adds to
the interactive element
between the AI system and a human
or just in general to intelligence?
So I think
going back to that
shared understanding bit
humans are very connected to their bodies.
I mean, one of the reasons,
one of the challenges in getting
an AI to kind of be a compatible
human intelligence
is that our physical bodies
are generating a lot of features
that make up
the input.
So in other words, where our bodies are
are the tool we use to
affect output, but
they also generate a lot of input
for our brains. So we generate
emotion, we generate all these
feelings, we generate all these signals
that machines don't have. So it means
those that have this as the input data
and they don't
have the feedback that says, okay, I've
gotten this, I've gotten this emotion
or I've gotten this idea, I now
want to process it and then I can
it then affects me
as a physical being and then
I can play that
out. In other words, I could realize
the implications of that, because the implications again on
my body complex
I then process that and
the implications again, our internal features
are generated. I learned from
them, they have an effect on my
mind body complex. So
it's interesting when we think, do we want
a human intelligence? Well
if we want a human compatible intelligence
probably the best thing to do is to embed
it in a human body.
Just to clarify, and both concepts are
beautiful, is a humanoid
robot. So a robot
that look like humans is one
or did you mean
actually
sort of what Elon Musk was working with
Neuralink, really
embedding intelligence
systems to ride along
human bodies?
No, I mean riding along is different.
I meant like if you want
to create an intelligence
that is human compatible
meaning that
it can learn and develop a shared
understanding of the world around it, you have to
give it a lot of the same substrate.
Part of that substrate
is the idea that it
generates these kinds of internal features
like sort of emotional stuff, it has similar
senses, it has to do a lot of the same
things with those same senses.
So I think
if you want that, again, I don't know that you want
that. That's not
my specific goal. I think that's a fascinating
scientific goal. I think it has all kinds of other implications.
That's sort of not the goal.
I want to create
I think of it as I create intellectual thought
partners for humans, that kind
of intelligence.
I know there are other companies that are creating
physical thought partners, physical partners
for humans, but that's
kind of not where I'm
at. But
the important point is that
a big part of
what we process
is that
physical experience of the world around us.
On the point of thought
partners, what role
does an emotional connection
or forgive me, love
have to play
in that thought partnership?
Is that something you're interested in
put another way sort of having
a deep connection
beyond
intellectual?
With the AI? Yeah, with the AI between human
and AI. Is that something that gets
in the way of the
the rational discourse?
Is that something that's useful?
I worry about biases, obviously.
So in other words, if you develop
an emotional relationship with the machine
all of a sudden you start are more likely
to believe what it's saying even if it doesn't
make any sense. So I
worry about that.
But at the same time, I think the opportunity
to use machines to provide human companionship
is actually not crazy.
Intellectual and
social companionship is not a crazy idea.
Do you have concerns
as a few people do
Elon Musk, Sam Harris
about long term existential threats
of AI
and perhaps short term threats
of AI? We talked about bias
we talked about different misuses but
do you have concerns about
thought partners
systems that are able to
help us make decisions together with humans
somehow having a significant negative impact
on society in the long term?
I think there are things to worry about.
I think the giving machines
too much leverage
is a problem
and what I mean by leverage
is too much
control over things that can hurt us
whether it's socially,
psychologically, intellectually, or physically
and if you give the machines too much control
I think that's a concern.
You forget about the AI, just when you give them
too much control human bad actors
can hack them
and produce havoc.
That's a problem
and you imagine
hackers taking over the driverless car network
and creating all kinds of
havoc
but you could also imagine
given
the ease at which humans could be persuaded
one way or the other
and now we have algorithms that can easily
take control over that
and amplify
all ways and move people one direction
or another.
Humans do that to other humans all the time
and we have marketing campaigns, we have political campaigns
that take advantage of
our emotions
or our fears
and this is done all the time
but with machines
machines are like giant megaphones
we can amplify this in orders of magnitude
and fine tune its control
so we can tailor the message
we can now very rapidly
additionally tailor the message to the audience
taking
advantage of their
biases and amplifying them
and using them to pursue them in one direction
or another in ways that are
not fair, not logical
not objective, not meaningful
and humans
machines empower that
so that's what I mean by leverage
it's not new
but wow it's powerful because
machines can do it more effectively
you know more quickly and we see that already
going on in social media
and other places
that's scary
and that's why
I'm
that's why
I go back to saying
one of the most important public
dialogues we could be having
is about the nature of intelligence
and the nature of
inference
and logic and reason and rationality
and
us understanding our own biases
us understanding our own cognitive biases
and how they work
and then how machines work
and how do we use them to complement
basically so that in the end we have
a stronger overall system
that's just incredibly important
I don't think
most people understand that
so like telling
telling your kids or telling your students
this goes back to the cognition
here's how your brain works
here's how easy it is
to trick your brain
there are fundamental cognizant
but you should appreciate
the different types of thinking
and how they work
and what you're prone to
and what do you prefer
and under what conditions
does this make sense versus that makes sense
and then say here's what AI can do
here's how it can make this worse
and here's how it can make this better
and that's where the AI has a role
is to reveal that
that tradeoff
so if you imagine
a system that is able
to
beyond any definition
of the Turing test
the benchmark really an AGI system
as a thought partner
that you one day
will create
what
question
topic of discussion
if you get to pick one
would you have with that system
what would you ask
and you get to find out
the truth
together
so you threw me a little bit
with finding the truth at the end but
because the truth is
a whole other topic
but the I think the beauty of it
I think what excites me is the beauty of it is
if I really have that system
I don't have to pick
so in other words I can go to
and say this is what I care about today
and that's what we mean by
like this general capability
go out, read this stuff in the next 3 milliseconds
and I want to talk to you about it
I want to draw analogies
I want to understand how this affects
this decision or that decision
what if this were true
what if that were true
what knowledge should I be aware of
that could impact my decision
here's what I'm thinking
is the main implication
can you prove that out
can you give me the evidence that supports that
can you give me evidence that supports this other thing
boy would that be incredible
would that be just incredible
just to be part of
whether it's a medical diagnosis
or whether it's the various treatment options
or whether it's a
legal case or whether it's
a social problem that people are discussing
be part of the dialogue
one that holds
itself
and us accountable
to reasons and objective dialogue
you know I just
goosebumps talking about it right
this is what I want
so when you created
please come back on the podcast
and we can have a discussion together
and make it even longer
this is a record for the longest conversation
and it was an honor, it was a pleasure
thank you so much for that